The Monkeys
I couldn’t be sure, next morning, if I had been dreaming or if I had really heard dogs barking in the
night and had seen them scampering about on the hillside below the cottage. There had been a Golden
Cocker, a Retriever, a Peke, a Dachshund, a black Labrador, and one or two nondescripts. They had
woken me with their barking shortly after midnight, and made so much noise that I got out of bed and
looked out of the open window. I saw them quite plainly in the moonlight, five or six dogs rushing
excitedly through the bracket and long monsoon grass.
It was only because there had been so many breeds among the dogs that I felt a little confused. I had
been in the cottage only a week, and I was already on nodding or speaking terms with most of my
neighbours. Colonel Fanshawe, retired from the Indian Army, was my immediate neighbour. He did
keep a Cocker, but it was black. The elderly Anglo-Indian spinsters who lived beyond the deodars
kept only cats. (Though why cats should be the prerogative of spinsters, I have never been able to
understand.) The milkman kept a couple of mongrels. And the Punjabi industrialist who had bought a
former prince’s palace — without ever occupying it — left the property in charge of a watchman who
kept a huge Tibetan mastiff.
None of these dogs looked like the ones I had seen in the night.
‘Does anyone here keep a Retriever?’ I asked Colonel Fanshawe, when I met him taking his
evening walk.
‘No one that I know of,’ he said, and he gave me a swift, penetrating look from under his bushy
eyebrows. ‘Why, have you seen one around?’
‘No, I just wondered. There are a lot of dogs in the area, aren’t there?’
‘Oh, yes. Nearly everyone keeps a dog here. Of course every now and then a panther carries one
off. Lost a lovely little terrier myself, only last winter.’
Colonel Fanshawe, tall and red-faced, seemed to be waiting for me to tell him something more —
or was he just taking time to recover his breath after a stiff uphill climb?
That night I heard the dogs again. I went to the window and looked out. The moon was at the full,
silvering the leaves of the oak trees.
The dogs were looking up into the trees, and barking. But I could see nothing in the trees, not even
an owl.
I gave a shout, and the dogs disappeared into the forest.
Colonel Fanshawe looked at me expectantly when I met him the following day. He knew something
about those dogs, of that I was certain; but he was waiting to hear what I had to say. I decided to
oblige him.
‘I saw at least six dogs in the middle of the night,’ I said. ‘A Cocker, a Retriever, a Peke, a
Dachshund, and two mongrels. Now, Colonel, I’m sure you must know whose they are.’
The Colonel was delighted. I could tell by the way his eyes glinted that he was going to enjoy
himself at my expense.
‘You’ve been seeing Miss. Fairchild’s dogs,’ he said with smug satisfaction.
‘Oh, and where does she live?’
‘She doesn’t, my boy. Died fifteen years ago.’
‘Then what are her dogs doing here?’
‘Looking for monkeys,’said the Colonel. And he stood back to watch my reactions.
‘I’m afraid I don’t understand,’ I said.
‘Let me put it this way,’said the Colonel. ‘Do you believe in ghosts?’
‘I’ve never seen any,’ I said.
‘But you have, my boy, you have. Miss. Fairchild’s dogs died years ago — a Cocker, a Retriever, a
Dachshund, a Peke, and two mongrels. They were buried on a little knoll under the oaks. Nothing odd
about their deaths, mind you. They were all quite old, and didn’t survive their mistress very long.
Neighbours looked after them until they died.’
‘And Miss. Fairchild lived in the cottage where I stay? Was she young?’
‘She was in her mid-forties, an athletic sort of woman, fond of the outdoors. Didn’t care much for
men. I thought you knew about her.’
‘No, I haven’t been here very long, you know. But what was it you said about monkeys? Why were
the dogs looking for monkeys?’
‘Ah, that’s the interesting part of the story. Have you seen the langur monkeys that sometimes come
to eat oak leaves?’
‘No.’
‘You will, sooner or later. There has always been a band of them roaming these forests. They’re
quite harmless really, except that they’ll ruin a garden if given half a chance … Well, Miss. Fairchild
fairly loathed those monkeys. She was very keen on her dahlias — grew some prize specimens — but
the monkeys would come at night, dig up the plants, and eat the dahlia-bulbs. Apparently they found
the bulbs much to their liking. Miss. Fairchild would be furious. People who are passionately fond of
gardening often go off balance when their best plants are ruined — that’s only human, I suppose.
Miss. Fairchild set her dogs at the monkeys, whenever she could, even if it was in the middle of the
night. But the monkeys simply took to the trees and left the dogs barking.’
‘Then one day — or rather, one night — Miss. Fairchild took desperate measures. She borrowed a
shotgun, and sat up near a window. And when the monkeys arrived, she shot one of them dead.’
The Colonel paused and looked out over the oak trees which were shimmering in the warm
afternoon sun.
‘She shouldn’t have done that,’ he said.
‘Never shoot a monkey. It’s not only that they’re sacred to Hindus — but they are rather human, you
know. Well, I must be getting on. Good-day!’ And the Colonel, having ended his story rather abruptly,
set off at a brisk pace through the deodars.
I didn’t hear the dogs that night. But next day I saw the monkeys — the real ones, not ghosts. There
were about twenty of them, young and old, sitting in the trees munching oak leaves. They didn’t pay
much attention to me, and I watched them for some time.
They were handsome creatures, their fur a silver-grey, their tails long and sinuous. They leapt
gracefully from tree to tree, and were very polite and dignified in their behaviour towards each other
— unlike the bold, rather crude red monkeys of the plains. Some of the younger ones scampered about
on the hillside, playing and wrestling with each other like schoolboys.
There were no dogs to molest them — and no dahlias to tempt them into the garden.
But that night, I heard the dogs again. They were barking more furiously than ever.
‘Well, I’m not getting up for them this time’ I mumbled, and pulled the blankets over my ears.
But the barking grew louder, and was joined by other sounds, a squealing and a scuffling.
Then suddenly the piercing shriek of a woman rang through the forest. It was an unearthly sound,
and it made my hair stand up.
I leapt out of bed and dashed to the window.
A woman was lying on the ground, and three or four huge monkeys were on top of her, biting her
arms and pulling at her throat. The dogs were yelping and trying to drag the monkeys off, but they
were being harried from behind by others. The woman gave another bloodcurdling shriek, and I
dashed back into the room, grabbed hold of a small axe, and ran into the garden.
But everyone — dogs, monkeys and shrieking woman — had disappeared, and I stood alone on the
hillside in my pyjamas, clutching an axe and feeling very foolish.
The Colonel greeted me effusively the following day.
‘Still seeing those dogs?’ he asked in a bantering tone.
‘I’ve seen the monkeys too,’ I said.
‘Oh, yes, they’ve come around again. But they’re real enough, and quite harmless.’
‘I know — but I saw them last night with the dogs.’
‘Oh, did you really? That’s strange, very strange.’
The Colonel tried to avoid my eye, but I hadn’t quite finished with him.
‘Colonel,’ I said. ‘You never did get around to telling me how Miss. Fairchild died.’
‘Oh, didn’t I? Must have slipped my memory. I’m getting old, don’t remember people as well as I
used to. But of course I remember about Miss. Fairchild, poor lady. The monkeys killed her. Didn’t
you know? They simply tore her to pieces …’
His voice trailed off, and he looked thoughtfully at a caterpillar that was making its way up his
walking-stick.
‘She shouldn’t have shot one of them,’ he said. ‘Never shoot a monkey — they’re rather human, you
know …’
